Nanotechnology is a known field of research since last century. Since
"nanotechnology” was presented by Nobel laureate Richard P. Feynman during his well famous 1959 lecture ‘‘There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom” (Feynman, 1960), there have been made various revolutionary developments in the field of nanotechnology. Nanotechnology produced materials of various types at nanoscale level. Nanoparticles (NPs) are wide class of materials that include particulate substances, which have one dimension less than 100 nm at least (Laurent et al., 2010). Depending on the overall shape these materials can be 0D, 1D, 2D or 3D (Tiwari et al., 2012). The importance of these materials realized when researchers found that size can influence the physiochemical properties of a substance e.g. the optical properties. A 20nm gold (Au), platinum (Pt), silver (Ag), and palladium (Pd) NPs have characteristic wine red color, yellowish gray, black and dark black colors, respectively. Fig. 1 shows an example of this illustration, in which
Au NPs synthesized with different sizes. These NPs showed characteristic colors and properties with the variation of size and shape, which can be utilized in bioimaging applications (Dreaden et al., 2012). As Fig. 1 indicates, the color of the solution changes due to variation in aspect ratio, nanoshell thickness and % gold concentration. The alteration of any of the above discussed factor influences the absorption properties of the NPs and hence different absorption colors are
observed.
NPs are not simple molecules itself and therefore composed of three layers i.e. (a) The surface layer, which may be functionalized with a variety of small molecules, metal ions, surfactants and polymers. (b) The shell layer, which is chemically different material from the core in
all aspects, and (c) The core, which is essentially the central portion of the NP and usually refers the NP itself (Shin et al., 2016). Owing to such exceptional characteristics, these materials got immense interest of researchers in multidisciplinary fields. Fig. 2 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmittance electron microscope (TEM) images of mesoporous and nonporous methacrylatefunctionalized silica (MA-SiO2). Mesoporousity imparts additional characteristics in NPs. The NPs can be employed for drug delivery (Lee et al., 2011), chemical and biological sensing (Barrak et al., 2016), gas sensing (Mansha et al., 2016; Rawal and Kaur, 2013; Ullah et al., 2017), CO2 capturing (Ganesh et al., 2017; Ramacharyulu et al., 2015) and other related applications (Shaalan
et al., 2016).
In this review article, we provide a general overview on the different
types, synthesis methods, characterizations, properties and applications of NPs. The last section is also provided with the future aspects
and recommendations.

NPs are broadly divided into various categories depending on their morphology, size and chemical properties. Based on physical and chemical characteristics, some of the wellknown classes of NPs are given as below.

Fullerenes and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) represent two major classes of carbon-based NPs. Fullerenes contain nanomaterial that are made of globular hollow cage such as allotropic forms of carbon. They have created noteworthy commercial interest due to their electrical conductivity, high strength, structure, electron affinity, and versatility (Astefanei et al., 2015). These materials possess arranged pentagonal and hexagonal carbon units, while each carbon is sp2 hybridized. Fig. 3 shows some of the well-known fullerenes consisting of C60 and C70 with
the diameter of 7.114 and 7.648 nm, respectively. CNTs are elongated, tubular structure, 1–2 nm in diameter (Ibrahim, 2013). These can be predicted as metallic or semiconducting reliant on their diameter telicity (Aqel et al., 2012). These are structurally resembling to graphite sheet rolling
upon itself (Fig. 4). The rolled sheets can be single, double or many walls and therefore they named as single-walled (SWNTs), double-walled (DWNTs) or multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs), respectively. They are widely synthesized by deposition of carbon precursors especially the atomic
carbons, vaporized from graphite by laser or by electric arc on to metal particles. Lately, they have been synthesized via chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique (Elliott et al., 2013).
Due to their unique physical, chemical and mechanical characteristics, these materials are not only used in pristine form but also in nanocomposites for many commercial applications such as fillers (Saeed and Khan, 2016, 2014), efficient gas adsorbents for environmental remediation (Ngoy et al.,
2014), and as support medium for different inorganic and organic catalysts (Mabena et al., 2011).


Metal NPs are purely made of the metals precursors. Due to well-known localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) characteristics, these NPs possess unique optoelectrical properties.
NPs of the alkali and noble metals i.e. Cu, Ag and Au have a broad absorption band in the visible zone of the electromagnetic solar spectrum. The facet, size and shape controlled synthesis of metal NPs is important in present day cutting-edge materials (Dreaden et al., 2012). Due to their advanced optical properties, metal NPs find applications in many research areas.
Gold NPs coating is widely used for the sampling of SEM, to enhance the electronic stream, which helps in obtaining high quality SEM images (Fig. 1). There are many other applications, which are deeply discussed in applications section of this review.

Ceramics NPs are inorganic nonmetallic solids, synthesized via heat and successive cooling. They can be found in amorphous, polycrystalline, dense, porous or hollow forms (Sigmund et al.,
2006). Therefore, these NPs are getting great attention of researchers due to their use in applications such as catalysis, photocatalysis, photodegradation of dyes, and imaging applications. (Thomas et al., 2015).

Semiconductor materials possess properties between metals and nonmetals and therefore they found various applications in the literature due to this property (Ali et al., 2017; Khan
et al., 2017a). Semiconductor NPs possess wide bandgaps and therefore showed significant alteration in their properties with bandgap tuning. Therefore, they are very important materials in photocatalysis, photo optics and electronic devices (Sun, 2000). As an example, variety of semiconductor NPs are found exceptionally efficient in water splitting applications,
due to their suitable bandgap and bandedge positions (Hisatomi et al., 2014)

These are normally organic based NPs and in the literature a special term polymer nanoparticle (PNP) collective used for it. They are mostly nanospheres or nanocapsular shaped (Mansha et al., 2017). The former are matrix particles whose overall mass is generally solid and the other molecules are
adsorbed at the outer boundary of the spherical surface. In the latter case the solid mass is encapsulated within the particle completely (Rao and Geckeler, 2011). The PNPs are readily
functionalize and thus find bundles of applications in the literature (Abd Ellah and Abouelmagd, 2016; Abouelmagd et al., 2016).

These NPs contain lipid moieties and effectively using in many biomedical applications. Generally, a lipid NP is characteristically spherical with diameter ranging from 10 to 1000 nm. Like polymeric NPs, lipid NPs possess a solid core made of lipid and a matrix contains soluble lipophilic molecules. Surfactants or emulsifiers stabilized the external core of these NPs (Rawat et al., 2011). Lipid nanotechnology (Mashaghi et al., 2013) is a special field, which focus the designing and synthesis of lipid NPs for various applications such as drug carriers and delivery (Puri et al., 2009) and RNA release in cancer therapy (Gujrati et al., 2014).

Various methods can be employed for the synthesis of NPs,but these methods are broadly divided into two main classes i.e. (1) Bottom-up approach and (2) Top-down approach (Wang and Xia, 2004) as shown in Scheme 1 (Iravani, 2011). These approaches further divide into various subclasses based
on the operation, reaction condition and adopted protocols.

In this method, destructive approach is employed. Starting from larger molecule, which decomposed into smaller units and then these units are converted into suitable NPs. Examples of this method are grinding/milling, CVD, physical vapor deposition (PVD) and other decomposition techniques
(Iravani, 2011). This approach is used to synthesized coconut
shell (CS) NPs. The milling method was employed for this purpose and the raw CS powders were finely milled for different interval of times, with the help of ceramic balls and a wellknown planetary mill. They showed the effect of milling time on the overall size of the NPs through different characterization techniques. It was determined that with the time increases the NPs crystallite size decreases, as calculated by Scherer equation. They also realized that with each hour increment
the brownish color faded away due to size decrease of the NPs. The SEM results were also in an agreement with the Xray pattern, which also indicated the particle size decreases
with time (Bello et al., 2015).

One study revealed the spherical magnetite NPs synthesis from natural iron oxide (Fe2O3) ore by top-down destructive approach with a particle size varies from 20 to 50 nm in
the presence of organic oleic acid (Priyadarshana et al., 2015). A simple top-down route was employed to synthesize colloidal carbon spherical particles with control size. The synthesis technique was based on the continuous chemical adsorption of polyoxometalates (POM) on the carbon interfacial
surface. Adsorption made the carbon black aggregates into relatively smaller spherical particles, with high dispersion capacity and narrow size distribution as shown in Fig. 5 (Garrigue
et al., 2004). It also revealed from the micrographs, that the size of the carbon particles become smaller with sonication time. A series of transition-metal dichalcogenide nanodots
(TMD-NDs) were synthesized by combination of grinding and sonication top-down techniques from their bulk crystals.
It was revealed that almost all the TMD-NDs with sizes <10 nm show an excellent dispersion due to narrow size distribution (Zhang et al., 2015). Lately, highly photoactive active
Co3O4 NPs were prepared via top-down laser fragmentation, which is a top-down process. The powerful laser irradiations generate well-uniform NPs having good oxygen vacancies
(Zhou et al., 2016). The average size of the Co3O4 was determined to be in the range of 5.8 nm ± 1.1 nm.

This approach is employed in reverse as NPs are formed from relatively simpler substances, therefore this approach is also called building up approach. Examples of this case are sedimentation and reduction techniques. It includes sol gel, green synthesis, spinning, and biochemical synthesis. (Iravani, 2011). Mogilevsky et al. synthesized TiO2 anatase NPs with
graphene domains through this technique (Mogilevsky et al., 2014). They used alizarin and titanium isopropoxide precursors to synthesize the photoactive composite for photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue. Alizarin was selected as it offers strong binding capacity with TiO2 through their axial hydroxyl terminal groups. The anatase form was confirmed by
XRD pattern. The SEM images taken for different samples with reaction scheme are provided in scheme 2. SEM indicates that with temperature elevation, the size of NPs also increases (Mogilevsky et al., 2014). Well-uniform spherical shaped Au nanospheres with monocrystalline have been synthesized via laser irradiation top-down technique (Liu et al., 2015a, 2015b). Liu et al. selectively transform the octahedra morphology to spherical shape by controlling the laser treatment time and other reaction
parameters. Fig. 6 provides the SEM and TEM of the prepared Au nanospheres, which showed average diameter of 75 ± 2.6 nm of Au nanospheres (red column Fig. 6e) and 72 ± 3.1 in edge length of Au octahedra per particle (blue column Fig. 6f).

More recently, solvent-exchange method is used to achieve limit sized low density lipoprotein (LDL) NPs for medical cancer drug delivery purpose by Needham et al. In this method
nucleation is the bottom approach followed by growth which is the up approach. The LDL NPs were obtained without using phospholipid and possessed high hydrophobicity, which is
essential for drug delivery applications (Needham et al., 2016).

The monodispersed spherical bismuth (Bi) NPs were synthesized by both top-down and bottom-up approaches (Wang and Xia, 2004). These NPs have excellent colloidal properties. In the bottom-up approach bismuth acetate was boiled within ethylene glycol, while in top-down approach
the bismuth was converted into molten form and then the molten drop was emulsified within the boiled diethylene glycol to produce the NPs. The size of the NPs obtained by both methods was varied from 100 nm to 500 nm (Wang and Xia, 2004).
The details of this study are provided in Scheme 3. Green and biogenic bottom-up synthesis attracting many researchers due to the feasibility and less toxic nature of processes. These processes are cost-effective and environmental friendly, where synthesis of NPs is accomplished via biological systems such as using plant extracts. Bacteria, yeast, fungi, Aloe vera, tamarind
and even human cells are used for the synthesis of NPs. Au NPs have been synthesis from the biomass of wheat and oat (Parveen et al., 2016) and using the microorganism and plant
extracts as reducing agent (Ahmed et al., 2016). Table 1 provides the merits and demerits of various top-down and bottom-up techniques with general remarks (Biswas et al., 2012).

Different characterization techniques have been practiced for the analysis of various physicochemical properties of NPs. These include techniques such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), infrared (IR), SEM, TEM, Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET), and particle size analysis.

The morphological features of NPs always attain great interest since morphology always influences most of the properties of the NPs. There are different characterization techniques for morphological studies, but microscopic techniques such as polarized optical microscopy (POM), SEM and TEM are the
most important of these.
SEM technique is based on electron scanning principle, and it provides all available information about the NPs at nanoscale level. Wide literature is available, where people used this technique to study not only the morphology of their nanomaterials, but also the dispersion of NPs in the bulk or matrix. The dispersion of SWNTs in the polymer matrix poly(butylene) terephthalate (PBT) and nylon-6 revealed through this technique (Saeed and Khan, 2016, 2014). The same group also
provides POM study of their materials, which showed star-like spherulites of the formed materials, whose size was decreased with the incremental filling of SWNTs. The morphological features of ZnO modified metal organic frameworks (MOFs) were studied through SEM technique, which indicates the ZnO NPs dispersion and morphologies of MOFs at different reaction conditions (Fig. 7) (Mirzadeh and Akhbari, 2016).
Similarly, TEM is based on electron transmittance principle, so it can provide information of the bulk material from very low to higher magnification. The different morphologies
of gold NPs are studied via this technique. Fig. 8 provides some TEM micrographs showing various morphologies of gold NPs, prepared via different methods (Khlebtsov and Dykman, 2011, 2010a, 2010b). TEM also provides essential information about two or more layer materials, such as the
quadrupolar hollow shell structure of Co3O4 NPs observed through TEM. These NPs founded to be exceptionally active as anode in Li-ion batteries (Fig. 9). Porous multishell structure induces shorter Li+ diffusion path length with adequate annulled space to buffer the volume expansion, good cycling performance, greater rate capacity, and specific capacity as
well (Wang et al., 2013).

The structural characteristics are of the primary importance to study the composition and nature of bonding materials. It provides diverse information about the bulk properties of the subject material. XRD, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX), XPS, IR,
Raman, BET, and Zieta size analyzer are the common techniques used to study structural properties of NPs.
XRD is one of the most important characterization techniques to reveal the structural properties of NPs. It gives enough information about the crystallinity and phase of NPs. It also provides rough idea about the particle size through Debye Scherer formula (Khan et al., 2017b, 2017c;
Ullah et al., 2017). This technique worked well in both single and multiphase NPs identification (Emery et al., 2016). Nevertheless, in the case of smaller NPs having size less than hundreds of atoms, the acquisition and correct measurement of structural and other parameters may be difficult. Moreover, NPs having more amorphous characteristics with varied inter
atomic lengths can influence the XRD diffractogram. In that case, proper comparison of the diffractograms of bimetallic NPs with those of the corresponding monometallic NPs and
their physical mixtures is required to obtain accurate information. Comparison of computer simulated structural model of bimetallic NPs with observed XRD spectra is the best way
to get good contrast (Ingham, 2015). EDX, which is normally fixed with field emission scanning electron miscopy (FE-SEM) or TEM device is widely used to know about the elemental
composition with a rough idea of % wt. The electron beam focused over a single NP by SEM or TEM through the program functions, to acquire the insight information from the NP under observation. NP comprises of constituent elements and each of them emits characteristics energy X-rays by electron beam irradiation. The intensity of specific X-ray is directly proportional to the concentration of the explicit element in the particle. This technique is widely used by researchers to give
support to SEM and other techniques for the confirmation of their elements in prepared materials (Avasare et al., 2015; Iqbal et al., 2016). The EDX technique used to determine
the elemental composition of ultra-sonochemically synthesized pseudo-flower shaped BiVO4 NPs (Khan et al., 2017b). Similarly, by utilizing similar technique the elemental confirmation
and graphene impregnation of In2O3/graphene heterostructure NPs was carried out, which showed C, In and O as contributing elements. This material was synthesized through conventional hydrothermal technique (Mansha et al., 2016). XPS is considered to be the most sensitive technique and it
is widely used to determine the exact elemental ratio and exact bonding nature of the elements in NPs materials. It is surface sensitive technique and can be used in depth profiling studies
to know the overall composition and the compositional variation with depth. XPS is based on the basic spectroscopic principles and typical XPS spectrum is composed of the number of electrons on Y-axis plot versus the binding energy (eV) of the electrons on X-axis. Each element has their own fingerprint binding energy value and thus gives specific set of XPS peaks.
The peaks correspond come from electronic configuration, e.g., 1s, 2s, 2p, and 3s. Lykhach et al. provide a depth electron transfer study through CeO2 supported Pt NPs using XPS
technique with support to others. They determined that per ten Pt atoms, only one electron is elated from the NPs to CeO2 support (Lykhach et al., 2015). The depth profile analysis was provided to study the dispersion of boron NPs (10 nm size) during polyethylene glycol (PEG) functionalization. Ar+
ions were used at 1.4 keV and 20 nm; depth surface etching was performed. It was revealed that the concentration of NPs increases from 2 to 5% with depth. This provided good
evidence that boron NPs are dissolved effectively within the bulk of functionalized PEG (Oprea et al., 2015). In similar study coreshell Au/Ag showed similar behavior through XPS
depth profiling. Wang et al. quantify the NPs coating with this technique through XPS and STEM spectroscopies by help of SESSA software (Wang et al., 2016).
Vibrational characterization of nanoparticles is normally studied via FT-IR and Raman spectroscopies. These techniques are the most developed and feasible as compared to other elemental analytical methods. The most important range for NPs is the fingerprint region, which provides signature
information about the material. In one study, functionalization of Pt NPs (1.7 nm mean size) and its interaction with Alumina substrate studied via FT-IR and XPS technique. FT-IR
confirms the functionalization as it showed the signature vibrational peaks of carboxylated C–O 2033 cm1, respectively in addition to a broader O–H peak at 3280 cm1. The degree of
functionalization was revealed from the red shift values of FT-IR bands (Fig. 10) (Dablemont et al., 2008).
In another study, a series of 5 mol% Eu3+ – doped rare earth metal (RE) hafnium oxide RE2Hf2O7 (where RE = Y, Pr, La, Gd, Lu and Er) (NPs) was synthesized by correlated techniques. FT-IR and Raman spectra analysis exhibited that the La2Hf2O7:5%Eu3+ and Pr2Hf2O7:5%Eu3+ possessed relatively ordered pyrochlore structure as compared to RE2Hf2O7:5%Eu3+ compositions (RE = Y, Er, and Lu), which
possess disordered fluorite structure. The stable structures were found thermodynamically stable until high temperature of 1500 C. However, a disordered–ordered cause instability
in the latter case, and thus thermodynamically unstable (Pokhrel et al., 2016).
More recently surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is evolving as vibrational conformational tool due to its signal enhanced capability via SPR phenomenon (Muehlethaler et al., 2016). One study reported SERS technique to study the vibrational properties with phonons modes in nanostructured and quantum dots NPS of TiO2, ZnO and PbS. They concluded that the enhanced spectra can be attributed to the plasmonic resonances in semiconductor systems (Ma et al., 2011).

Different techniques can be used to estimate the size of the NPs. These include SEM, TEM, XRD, AFM, and dynamic light scattering (DLS). SEM, TEM, XRD and AFM can give better idea about the particle size (Kestens et al., 2016), but the zeta potential size analyzer/DLS can be used to find the NPs
size at extremely low level. In one study Sikora et al. used DLS technique to investigate the size variation of silica NPs with absorption of proteins from serum. The results showed that size increased with acquisition of protein layer. However, in case of agglomeration and hydrophilicity, DLS might prove incapable of accurate measurement, so in that case we should
rely on the high-resolution technique of differential centrifugal sedimentation (DCS) (Sikora et al., 2016). Beside DSC, nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) is relatively newer and
special technique, which can be helpful in case of biological systems such as proteins, and DNA. In NTA method, we can visualize and analyze the NPs in liquids media that relates
the Brownian motion rate to particle size. This technique allows us to find the size distribution profile of NPs with diameter ranging from 10 to 1000 nm in a liquid medium (Filipe et al., 2010). This technique produced some good results as compared to DLS and found to be very precise for sizing
monodisperse as well as polydisperse samples, with substantially better peak resolution. Gross et al. detected the particle size and concentration of different sized NPs in suspensions of polymer and protein samples and provided an overview on the effect of experimental and data evaluation parameters
(Gross et al., 2016).
Large surface area of nanomaterials offers great room for various applications and BET is the best technique to determine the surface area of NPs materials. This technique is based on adsorption and desorption principle and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) theorem. Normally nitrogen gas is used for this purpose. BET produces four types of isotherm specifically, which are labeled as Type-I, Type-II, Type-III and Type-IV (Fagerlund, 1973). The fresh 7Cu3Ce/ZSM-5 showed typical features of Type-I isotherm obtain from nitrogen adsorption/desorption. It was discovered that N2 adsorption volume is progressively increased with relative pressure until certain limit signifying the availability of pores. The BET specific surface area for this material was 133–144 m2/g, while the total pore volume was 0.112–0.185 cm3/g. But after sulphidation process, the BET surface area reduced to 110 m2
/mg and the pore volume decreased to 0.096 cm3 /g, respectively (Liu et al., 2016).

Optical properties are of great concerned in photocatalytic applications and therefore, photo-chemists acquired good knowledge of this technique to reveal the mechanism of their
photochemical processes. These characterizations are based on the famous beer-lambert law and basic light principles (Swinehart, 1962). These techniques give information about the absorption, reflectance, luminescence and phosphorescence properties of NPs. It is widely known that NPs especially metallic and semiconductor NPs possess different colors and therefore, best harmonized for photo-related applications. So, it is always interesting to know the value of absorption
and reflectance of these materials to understand the basic mechanism for each application. Ultraviolet–visible (UV–Vis), photoluminescence (PL) and the null ellipsometer are
the well-known optical instruments, which can be used to study the optical properties of NPs materials.
The UV/vis- diffuse reflectance spectrometer (DRS) is a fully equipped device which can be used to measure the optical absorption, transmittance and reflectance. The former two are
supplementary to each other while the latter (DRS) is a special technique use for sold samples mostly. The method is exceptionally acceptable for the determination of bandgaps of NPs
and other nanomaterials. Bandgap of materials is very important to conclude about the photoactivity and conductance of the material. The carbon nanodot-carbon nitride (C3N4) was
found to be a metal free water splitting photocatalyst. The photo ability of this material is directly correlated to the bandgap value of 2.74–2.77 eV, which was calculated using UV–Vis
spectroscopy (Liu et al., 2015a, 2015b). Similarly, this technique also use to see the absorption shift in case of doping, composite formation or heterostructure NPs materials. Peng et al. synthesis MMT, LaFeO3 and LaFeO3/MMT nanocomposites and studied variation in their electromagnetic radiations absorption through UV–vis DRS to reconnoiter their optical characteristics. The strong red shift observed in case of nanocomposite as compared to pristine MMT and LaFeO3
NPs. LaFeO3 and LaFeO3/MMT displayed rather broad absorption band from 400 to 620 nm, showing decrease in their bandgap. This property makes these catalysts considerable for
solar light driven photocatalysis (Peng et al., 2016). In addition to UV, PL also considers valuable technique to study the optical properties of the photoactive NPs and other nanomaterials. This technique offers additional information about the absorption or emission capacity of the materials
and their effect on the overall excitation time of photoexcitons. Thus, it provides significant information about the charge recombination and half-life of the excited materials in their
conductance band, which are useful for all photo related and imaging applications. The PL spectrum can be recorded as emission or absorbance depending on the nature of study.
Fig. 11 shows a typical PL spectrum of pristine and modified ZnO NPs. It is evident from this figure that pristine ZnO NPs show high PL intensity as compared to CdS modified
ZnO NPs. The gold embedded CdS/Au/ZnO composite shows the lowest intensity. This quenching from pure ZnO to CdS/ Au/ZnO can be attributed to the decrease in the rate of charge
recombination and larger lifetime of photoexcitons in the latter case (Yu et al., 2013). In addition, this technique is successfully used to determine the thickness of layer (Lin et al., 2015), doping quantity of (Gupta et al., 2013; Pal et al., 2012) material and defects/oxygen vacancies determination (Torchynska et al., 2016) of NPs.
Similarly, Wan et al. determined the values of refractive index and extinction coefficient for hollow gold NPs (HGNPs) via spectroscopic ellipsometry. They prepared a series of HG-NPs, with different morphologies and plasmonic properties and the optical constants were calculated. The values
were compared with the optical constant values of solid gold NPs, which gave good indication to use these materials in chemical sensing applications due to their sensitive nature as revealed from ellipsometric values (Wan et al., 2009).

As discussed earlier, various physicochemical properties such as large surface area, mechanically strong, optically active and chemically reactive make NPs unique and suitable applicants for various applications. Some of their important properties are discuss in the following section.

The optical and electronic properties of NPs are interdependent to greater extent. For instance, noble metals NPs have size dependent optical properties and exhibit a strong UV–visible extinction band that is not present in the spectrum of the bulk metal. This excitation band results when the incident photon frequency is constant with the collective excitation of the conduction electrons and is known as the localized surface plasma resonance (LSPR). LSPR excitation results in the wavelength selection absorption with extremely large molar excitation coefficient resonance Ray light scattering with efficiency equivalent to that of ten fluorophores and enhanced local electromagnetic fields near the surface of NPs that enhanced spectroscopies. It is well established that the peak
wavelength of the LSPR spectrum is dependent upon the size, shape and interparticle spacing of the NPs as well as its own dielectric properties and those of its local environment including the substrate, solvents and adsorbates (Eustis and ElSayed, 2006). Gold colloidal NPs are accountable for the rusty colors seen in blemished glass door/windows, while Ag NPs are typically yellow. Actually, the free electrons on the surface in these NPs (d electrons in Ag and gold) are freely transportable through the nanomaterial. The mean free path for Ag and gold is 50 nm, which is more than the NPs size of these materials. Thus, no scattering is expected from the bulk,
upon light interaction, instead they set into a standing resonance conditions, which is responsible for LSPR in these NPs (Fig. 12) (Khlebtsov and Dykman, 2010a, 2010b).	

Magnetic NPs are of great curiosity for investigators from an eclectic range of disciplines, which include heterogenous and homogenous catalysis, biomedicine, magnetic fluids, data storage magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and environmental remediation such as water decontamination. The literature
revealed that NPs perform best when the size is <critical value i.e. 10–20 nm (Reiss and Hu¨tten, 2005). At such low scale the magnetic properties of NPs dominated effectively, which make these particle priceless and can be used in different applications (Faivre and Bennet, 2016; Priyadarshana et al., 2015; Reiss and Hu¨tten, 2005; Zhu et al., 1994). The uneven electronic distribution in NPs leads to magnetic property. These properties are also dependent on the synthetic protocol and various synthetic methods such as solvothermal (Qi et al., 2016), coprecipitation, micro-emulsion, thermal decomposition, and flame spray synthesis can be used for their preparation (Wu
et al., 2008).

The distinct mechanical properties of NPs allow researchers to look for novel applications in many important fields such as tribology, surface engineering, nanofabrication and nanomanufacturing. Different mechanical parameters such as elastic modulus, hardness, stress and strain, adhesion and friction can be surveyed to know the exact mechanical nature of
NPs. Beside these parameters surface coating, coagulation, and lubrication also aid to mechanical properties of NPs (Guo et al., 2014) (see Scheme 4). NPs show dissimilar mechanical properties as compared to microparticles and their bulk materials. Moreover, in a lubricated or greased contact,
the contrast in the stiffness between NPs and the contacting external surface controls whether the NPs are indented into the plan surface or deformed when the pressure at contact is
significantly large. This important information could divulge how the NPs perform in the contact situation. Decent controls over mechanical features of NPs and their interactions with
any kind of surface are vital for enlightening the surface quality and elevating material removal. Fruitful outcomes in these fields generally need a deep insight into the basics of the
mechanical properties of NPs, such as elastic modulus and hardness, movement law, friction and interfacial adhesion and their size dependent characteristics (Guo et al., 2014).

It is well-known fact that metals NPs have thermal conductivities higher than those of fluids in solid form. For example, the thermal conductivity of copper at room temperature is about
700 times greater than that of water and about 3000 times greater than that of engine oil. Even oxides such as alumina (Al2O3) have thermal conductivity higher than that of water.
Therefore, the fluids containing suspended solid particles are expected to display significantly enhanced thermal conductivities relative to those of conventional heat transfer fluids.
Nanofluids are produced by dispersing the nanometric scales solid particles into liquid such as water, ethylene glycol or oils. Nanofluids are expected to exhibit superior properties relative to those of conventional heat transfer fluids and fluids containing microscopic sized particles. Because the heat transfer takes place at the surface of the particles, it is desirable to use the particles with large total surface area. The large total surface area also increases the stability suspension (Lee et al., 1999).
Recently it has been demonstrated that the nanofluids consisting of CuO or Al2O3 NPs in water or ethylene exhibit advance thermal conductivity (Cao, 2002).
